Tracy, when I first heard of the tariffs
on Liberation Day, I thought that
liberation doesn't sound very much like
an American word. It sounds much more
like a Chinese word uh to to my ears.
The
>> five liberations campaign.
>> Yes. Right. We're going to we're going
to liberate Taiwan into socialism. You
know, this is um this is what they're up
to. And certainly there are a lot of
aspects in which the US and Trump in
particular is copying China. We are
making Intel a stateowned enterprise
with American characteristics. Uh
there's a lot of questions now with data
probity uh and whether the unemployment
figures are going to be uh well
reported. Um and there is kind of just
this you know visiting stochcastic
terror on the downtrodden um especially
uh undocumented uh immigrants and all of
these things are you know not very nice
things that I think that uh Trump is
learning uh from but I think there are
better things to emulate because a lot
of what Trump is building are gilded
ballrooms and detention centers and you
know we're getting quite a lot of just I
think many of the worst aspects of
authoritarianism
[Music]
Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> Joe, we are recording this on August
27th. Did you catch the uh the Trump
cabinet meeting yesterday? Oh.
Uh, I I could I I saw your tweets and
they looked like some of the most, you
know, obsequious I mean, a lot of these
have unusually obsequious, but even Yes,
I saw your tweets.
>> You could just say yes. Um,
>> so there were a bunch of things that
stood out, but one in particular was
Donald Trump talking about building out
new energy capacity. And he said
specifically,
I'm going to quote here, you know, in
China they do it very quickly. They have
one person that says do it and that's
it. But essentially, we have one person
that says do it and we've given that
order.
>> Uh yeah, you know, like um the he's he's
very abundance coded. He seems to have
this impulse to get rid of all of the
myriad checks and balances and all these
things that stand in the way of
developing things. So it sounds like uh
Trump is abundance pill. I assume that's
the direction you're going in.
>> Yes. If there's one thing I think you
could say about China's economy and its
political economy, it is that China is
pretty good at building things, right?
And we've seen various examples of that
over time. Uh back when I was living in
Hong Kong, I took the highspeed rail
from Hong Kong to Beijing and that was
absolutely amazing. You could get to
Beijing in less than a day. The US is
nowhere near having anything like that.
and I speak as someone who takes Amtrak
in the northeast regularly. Uh on the
other hand, China at various times has
produced too much. Right?
>> It's accused as such, right? This is uh
I know that people say this.
>> Okay. Uh but for instance, uh you think
back to the ghost cities.
>> Sure.
>> Uh bridges to nowhere.
>> Sure. And they were bridges to nowhere
at the time. Yeah. amusement parks that
no one goes to.
>> Definitely. Although we have amusement
parks here that no one goes to.
>> Disagree. Disagree hard. Um but this has
sparked a uh new movement in China by
policy makers called involution. Yes.
>> Which is basically an attempt to uh
reduce over capacity in terms of
building things. There's definitely no
question that um you know there does
seem to be this phenomenon which the uh
government in Beijing seems highly
cognizant of which is this sort of like
profitless competition much of it driven
by the incentive structure that is borne
by the provinces promoting their local
champions and so for as much like sort
of success as some of these uh companies
have on some metrics um you know there's
no money to be made in many cases it
sounds sort of nice from the consumer
perspective
you know, it's like zer era 2010s when
we were all getting like, you know,
cheap Ubers and stuff like that. But,
you know, there's a seems to be a risk
of certain internal imbalances on that
front.
>> I think the issue is you have a lot of
companies who are basically producing
all the same thing and therefore, you
know, racing to the bottom in terms of
price and no one can actually make
money. And I don't know about you, but
if I was a startup founder, I would
probably want to make money, right, at
some point. I would not want to be
locked in a forever competition in terms
of who could, you know, drive the
absolute lowest cost.
>> Well, what if you were just a normal
consumer who wasn't a founder?
>> Sadly, that is what I am. Um, okay.
Well, on this note, we have the perfect
guest. We're going to be speaking with
Dan Wong, friend of the pod, and who has
just written a new book called
Breakneck: China's Quest to Engineer the
Future. He's also a research scholar at
the Hoover Institution. And so Dan,
welcome back to the show.
>> Thanks so much, Tracy. Really glad to
talk about Moby Dick with my friends.
>> Why do you cause trouble? Why do you
cause trouble? You know, like
>> I was actually wondering if you were
going to bring up the Moby Dick
reference in the book.
>> Trouble between us.
>> Joe, I've been a for a very
long time and maybe this is what we need
to be getting into.
>> That's right. Um, okay. Simple question
to start. Why does China like building
stuff? China likes building stuff
because it is made up of a leadership
that is very heavily engineering pill.
Uh many of them have been engineers
trained of a very Soviet sort. Hydraulic
engineers, electrical engineers, thermal
engineers, which is kind of a term in uh
China that means uh producing coal and
processing coal.
>> Uh they treat the mega project as the
solution to every problem. They are
building enormous dams. They're building
a big new dam now uh that is going to
use 60 times more concrete than the
Hoover Dam. They're going to it's going
to produce I think three times as much
power as the three gorgeous dam. But
this is a lot of their solutions to a
lot of different economic problems and
social problems as well that new
highways, new homes, coal plants,
hyperscalers, it's what they know how to
do and it's what they're going to do.
First of all, before we go any further,
I just want to say like
>> uh having spoken to for years, I'm
thrilled of all the recognition you're
getting for this book. And I know we
weren't like the first to discover Dan
Wong. I think the first um T I think
Tyler Cohen uh Tyler Cohen got there
first. But it's been fantastic talking
to you over the years. And there's sort
of like vindication I think of your
career, etc. because now everyone's come
around. Everyone wants to see the world
through the Dan Wong lens. So, thank uh
I just wanted to say how exciting it is
and happy for you that you're getting
all this
>> Joe's channeling the Trump cabinet
meeting.
>> I'm being I'm being um
>> Am I Trump?
>> Yeah. Uh yeah, I guess.
>> Okay, good. Okay.
>> You know, how much do you think like um
you know, as Tracy mentioned, uh Trump
talked about, you know, someone says do
it and then they do it. And I'm but I'm
curious like how much is it would you
say like the political system really
allows for that versus the sort of the
actual like breadth of labor and just
engineering knowledge like how would you
tilt the sort of political structure
versus the skills?
>> I think it's both. So, China has a lot
of economic ministries like the NDRC,
the National Development and Reform
Commission, and the MIT, the Ministry of
Industry and Information Technologies.
You have all of these planners that are
making new plans all the time, and they
have exactly great plans to know where
the next subway station in Beijing or
Shenzhen or Quiming ought to go. And so
there's plenty of shovelready projects
because people have already been
planning for these things for years. And
every time China's economy has any sort
of a wobble, uh, then the Chinese
government and the Communist Party says,
"Okay, well, we're going to build
another really big dam or we're going to
build more highway systems." So you have
a lot of shovelready projects in place
and then you have the government
thinking that, well, pouring more
concrete is still going to be the
solution to a lot of our different
problems. And on top of that, you have a
very skilled manufacturing workforce.
You have a very skilled public sector
that has been building a lot of
high-speed trains, uh that have been
building a lot of big ships, that have
been building subway systems. They know
how to do this stuff. And so it just
comes really naturally. You have the
system plus the politics all favoring a
lot of construction.
>> When you say Chinese policy makers are,
you know, made up of engineers, I have
two questions. So one, how did that come
to be? And then secondly, could you
maybe give us some specific examples of
how that manifests in actual policy? So
for instance, does having an engineering
background make you perhaps
better at making strategic decisions
about economic priorities? Like how does
that background actually come into play?
>> I think China's engineering state has
deep roots. Uh but the modern
manifestation really took shape uh after
the 1980s when Dung Xiaoing took over
from the total mayhem of the Mao years
and Deng Xiaoing thought well Mao was
kind of this poet he was a warlord. He
was a romantic. He was a murderer. What
is the opposite of all of that? Well,
we're going to put mechanical engineers
within the poll bureau. And that is
exactly what Dunia did. So throughout
the 1980s and uh the 1990s uh don't put
a lot of engineers in the pilot bureau
such that by the year 2002 every single
member of the standing committee all
nine people uh especially Huenta and
Wabal uh the general secretary and the
premier at the time um everyone had
degrees in engineering and that has
fluctuated a little bit uh by the time
that Cin Ping came to office whose
undergrad was a chemical engineer. um
you know I think he saw the light and
his uh doctorate was Marxist economics.
So you know we have an we have a a
pseudoeconomist up there. Um by the time
that he came into office his premier uh
the Kyang was trained in I believe law
and economics in the 20th party congress
after uh 2022 uh China's engineers are
really uh dominant again which you have
a lot of uh people from the
military-industrial complex um be in the
top of the pilot bureau but I also want
to suggest um but playfully and lightly
that there are um ancient
roots of China's engineering state as
well. This is famously the state that
administered a vast examination system
which people became uh mandarins by
doing these exams administered by the
court. You had a lot of Chinese emperors
that didn't hesitate to conscript people
to build great walls or grand canals. So
these are fortifications and waterway
systems. Um, and so I don't want to take
this too literally, but you can sort of
see how a lot of emperors never really
hesitated to completely restructure a
person's relationship to our land. And
so that's a little bit deeper, too.
>> So, you know, Tracy mentioned that and I
and I have no doubt that it's true that
there's, you know, there's various like
white elephant projects or things that
get built that aren't necessary and your
book uh talks about them uh them. Um,
all that being said, it seems like one
of the objective facts in the world is
that Chinese living standards and the
economy has expanded dramatically in the
last 10, 20 years like to an
extraordinary degree. Uh, does the
success of all these Chinese planning
boards do you think it like strikes a
heart in certain conventionalism?
Planning isn't supposed to work.
Economists are very skeptical of
planning. the hayakian idea that the
market and prices are the best signals
for these things. What do you what kind
of challenge does China's success pose
to some of these ideas?
>> I don't want to
think that China's success strikes at
the very heart of planning in economics.
I think that China has not demonstrated
the success of central planning at
large. I think I would defend a narrower
case that a lot of construction has been
good for a lot of people. So I think
that China's
>> what other test is there?
>> Well, I think that is a uh there maybe
there are other tests which is that uh
whether people are happy uh I think that
is a decent test whether they feel the
ability to have creative expression um
whether they feel that their lives are
going to be better uh because they're
able to save some money. I think it's
not just about the physical living
standards, although I think that is
really important because I've spent
plenty of time uh in China's richer
zones. I was living in Hong Kong,
Beijing, and Shanghai where you can see
that these cities get better and better
every year. You have new subway
stations. Shanghai this year will have a
thousand parks up from 500 in uh 2020.
Uh you know, all of these cities are
really highly functional. I've been in
China's southwest and Gujo province,
China's fourth poorest province. And you
have these enormous bridges that are
bridges to nowhere when they start, but
then to nowhere has become maybe two
somewhere after it is built. And people
actually feel a lot of pride about all
of these things. And so I think that a
lot of construction, a lot of home
building, a lot of electricity
production through coal as well as hydro
and solar, these things are all really
good. I think you can definitely point
to a lot of costs. There's a lot of
material waste and all of this concrete
that's very carbon intensive. There's a
lot of financial problems. Guo can't
really pay a lot of its debts right now.
There's a lot of displacement of people.
Three gorgeous dam displays something
like a million people. I would say that
physical construction is mostly pretty
good though there are plenty of costs. I
talk more about financial problems from
all of this because obviously the local
government debt situation has been much
discussed but you point out in the book
for instance that you can see you know
evidence of some of this impact in
things like Chinese stocks. So because
you have all these companies who are
basically racing to the bottom in terms
of price it's difficult for them to
produce a profit and so the stock price
basically has traded sideways for like a
decade. I guess part of that would also
be uh capital controls and the impact
from that. But how does this manifest in
terms of finances?
>> Well, let's take a look at something
like the solar industry which I think is
kind of an emblematic Chinese success.
Uh you have uh China producing something
like 90% of the solar uh PV modules uh
in the world. But China isn't only
producing the final product, it is also
producing all of the polysilicon as well
as all the tools to produce uh solar.
Um, and in the solar industry, you have
basically zero differentiation between
most of the big solar producers. You
know, something like the third largest
solar producer in China is not that
different from the 15th largest and
maybe not even that different from the
30th largest. They're all making pretty
undifferentiated products. And you know
what this has represented is kind of a
strategic triumph for the Chinese
government that they have a lock on what
are these critical industries of the
future that a lot of countries will
need. It is awesome for consumers
everywhere. Uh so if you are trying to
build a solar panel onto your roof
either in China or in the US, you know,
solar costs have plunged something like
94% uh since the year 2000 or so. I
think that's that's about the right
figure. And it's been total misery for
these companies as well as their
investors. And maybe, just maybe, this
might be what socialism with Chinese
characteristics means, which is a lot of
state power, a lot of consumer power,
but not very much financial investor
benefit.
>> So,
speaking of Herman Melville, this is not
about Moby Dick. Um, I'm actually
thinking about uh uh his uh novela
Bartleby in which um you know, the
famous character Bartleby decides I I
would prefer not to. he's working on
Wall Street and then one day he he would
prefer not to and the people around him
are completely exasperated at this
person and of course we saw the um you
know the li with some few years ago
people were talking about the live flat
movement and so when you talk about oh
you know like perhaps it's come at the
cost of happiness like how widespread is
this how much of this success in China I
mean one of the other aspects of you
know unions aren't uh legal in China I
presume striking isn't legal in China
and so forth. Like how much of this
material success that everyone enjoys to
some extent in your view has come down
to is sort of extracting the worker
surplus and how big do you think is is
there like a larger brewing impulse to
fight against that?
>> Well, when I first read Bartleby the
scribe, I saw some commentary that it's
actually a lot about homoeroticism. I
thought that maybe that's where we were
going to go, but maybe we'll take a look
at that later. I think that you know
whether people in China are happy is
always a very interesting and
excessively broad question and I always
wonder about things like that.
>> I wonder if anyone's happy in the world
but keep going.
>> You know Bhutan with something like four
traffic lights in the country is
supposed to be super happy. No, we don't
really we don't really get that.
Certainly we can observe that there are
a lot of Chinese mostly elites uh who
are interested in creative expression.
many of them have become deeply
unsatisfied. So they uh are moving to
the Netherlands, they're moving to New
York, they're moving to Mai. I've seen
some of their events uh here in New
York. There's a feminist stand-up comedy
uh which is you know having a lot of
comedy shows in Chinese uh that is um
pretty active of a scene here in uh
Manhattan actually. And so there's a lot
of people uh I mean journalists who have
had their pieces completely censored,
Six Ways to Sunday um who are pretty
dissatisfied. There's plenty of people
dissatisfied uh in Shanghai who had a
horrible time uh throughout the
lockdown. And we had these astonishing
numbers of something like uh at its peak
40,000 Chinese flying to Ecuador where
they don't have to get a visa to walk up
to the southwestern border in the United
States because uh they are so upset with
Xiinping. But, you know, is the broader
mass of Chinese unhappy? Well, pretty
hard to say. I think there are plenty of
people who are working for stateowned
enterprises and you know, not really
enjoying much of their time there. You
could be working for one of these big
tech companies and working 96 hours uh
9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 12 days 6 days a
week and that's not very happy. Um, you
could be living with your parents
because
>> which by the way is the same in Silicon
Valley.
>> Well, I thought it was the same as
Bloomberg. Yeah, it's probably 997 in
Silicon Valley, but
>> do you get equity in the company in
return for your hard work?
>> Uh, maybe some of them do, but it's
probably not to the same extent in
Silicon Valley. Um, but at the same
time, you know, if you're a young
Chinese living in Shanghai, um, perhaps
your cost of living is not super high
because you're living with your parents,
you get to save some money by working at
a stateowned enterprise. You have
excellent cafes popping up all the time.
A lot of things are pretty cheap. you
can get a bowl of noodles really
cheaply. And you know, for people who
are debating whether they want to try
to, you know, strike their um try to
make a career in London or New York and
try to be really ambitious or just have
a tamping lifestyle, lifelat lifestyle
uh in Shanghai, maybe that's kind of a
wash. So, I don't see simmering
discontent that threatens to topple
regime, but certainly there are plenty
of people dissatisfied.
>> There's also arguably um a sort of
existential
dread uh hanging over certain sectors or
certain entrepreneurs, which is that at
any time the Chinese government could
change its mind about what industry it
actually wants to promote and nurture.
And we saw that happen, I think, when
you and I were both in Hong Kong in
2020, 2022.
And this was a big deal. So this idea
that China all of a sudden kind of
turned its back on more consumeroriented
technology companies, how big of a
legacy did that have or how big of an
impact did that have on the sort of
entrepreneurial spirit of China?
>> There's plenty of data to suggest that
funds uh investing in, you know, VC
funds in China are having a hard time
actually raising funds and also having a
hard time deploying their capital. Um
certainly it's become pretty difficult
for a lot of startups to exit uh because
they can't necessarily list in the US
and they can't necessarily list very
easily in China as well. China's
consumption uh over the last few years
has been pretty limp after the COVID
crackdowns. A lot of uh companies had to
have pretty extensive layoffs. Um and
you know they're just not having a
really easy time uh given the limp
consumption spending at large uh in
China. I think this goes to a kind of a
broader point within authoritarian
systems uh which is that no one feels
very safe uh in a lot of authoritarian
systems. You can be an elite in Beijing
and what is your life going to be? Your
life could be working in the financial
industry uh which is a definite elite
everywhere uh including in Beijing. And
two years ago, uh, Beijing announced
that it was going to have a salary cap
of $300,000 roughly for people working
in stateowned banks. And if you made
over, uh, that figure last couple of
years, you may have to give some money
back to the government. Maybe you're
working for a tech company and you think
that online education is going to be
totally safe because Chinese love
education and they're always going to be
spending more money on their kids. Uh,
and then that worked uh, until the
government declared, uh, everything must
be a nonprofit. If you're working for
the military, if you're working for the
government, uh your life could be
subject to either a corruption crackdown
or some sort of the political winds
changing and your patron is no longer in
place and then your whole network of
patronage has to fall. And so this is
one of these things where there is kind
of this apocalyptic sense that hangs uh
over you if you're living in Beijing,
Shanghai, perhaps even Hong Kong where a
lot of your life could fall apart and
there's no one really to protect you, no
lawyers that you can turn to, no court
system to really turn to.
>> You know, one of these things that uh
comes up a lot and I don't really find
it to be that interesting of a
conversation like, oh, is China a
communist or capitalist? And it seems
like a very tedious conversation. I mean
it has a you know a Leninist system of
government. I think that fact is safe to
say.
>> Is it on pace? Is it in going in the
direction of something that we could
call socialist? I think Denopang said
the goal was to have a modern socialist
state by the year 2049. So 24 years from
now is it going in a direction that
would be described this is a this is
socialism. Well, there are a bunch of
Marxists over there and they would
always tell you that uh history is the
most important and we are marching
towards socialism. So, their answer is
yes. I have my doubts. I took a look at
China today and I think it is the most
right-wing uh major country in the
world. This is a country that really
prizes manufacturing above all else. Uh
it doesn't really have much by way of
immigration. You have a state that
enforces totally traditional gender
roles and you have a pretty minimal
welfare safety net where taxes in China
are not actually that high. It is pretty
regressively funded on consumption
taxes. This is a country that arrests
union organizers and has busted up
certain Marxist reading groups uh in
universities. And I take a look at that
and I think doesn't this look kind of
like Eisenhower's America? You know,
this is
>> it certainly doesn't sound liberal. It
doesn't sound very liberal at all and
I'm not even sure if it sounds very
socialist. There is absolutely a
Leninist aspect in which state control
of public enterprises, you know, public
ownership of production is very much
real. Um, many important sectors,
telecommunications, aviation, energy are
stateowned and you have some
redistribution between the provinces.
But, you know, kind of my handy snapshot
is not to think of China as socialist or
autocratic. I think these are pretty
limited terms that don't really offer
much anymore. My simple formulation of
China is that it is a Londonist
technocracy with grand opera
characteristics. Uh pretty rational most
of the time, but then some every so
often we'll though do something pretty
preposterous and then kind of collapse
in something really ridiculous.
>> That said, we have seen recently China
make some moves to boost social safety
nets. So, they've said they're going to,
you know, do more for seniors and
they're also going to try to boost
consumer spending. Um, one thing that I
thought was kind of amusing was they
basically rolled out a cash for clunkers
equivalent. Uh, and again, I think of
all those things, a focus on consumer
spending, social safety nets, although
arguably in the US those are perhaps
declining. Um, cash for clunkers, that
sort of thing. I think of that as very
American in many ways in terms of the
political economy. And meanwhile in the
US, you know, Trump is talking about how
he wants to be more efficient in terms
of controlling the economy like China.
We've also had some instances of the US
government taking stakes in companies
recently. That seems very Chinese in
certain respects. Is the US starting to
emulate China and China emulate the US?
Tracy, when I first heard of the tariffs
on Liberation Day, I thought that
liberation doesn't sound very much like
an American word. It sounds much more
like a Chinese word uh to to my ears.
>> The five liberations campaign.
>> Yes. Right. We're going to we're going
to liberate Taiwan into socialism. You
know, this is um this is what they're up
to. And certainly there are a lot of
aspects in which the US and Trump in
particular is copying China. We are
making Intel a stateowned enterprise
with American characteristics. Uh
there's a lot of questions now with data
probit uh and whether the unemployment
figures are going to be uh well
reported. Um and like there is kind of
just this you know visiting stochastic
terror on the downtrodden um especially
uh undocumented uh immigrants and all of
these things are you know not very nice
things that I think that uh Trump is
learning uh from she and right now I
think what we have is authoritarianism
without the good stuff and the good
stuff of actually building um quite a
lot of mass transit and clean technology
um generation um clean energy generation
rather
uh you know we don't really have you
know the Port Authority bus terminal
being built and renovated um on time. We
don't have California highspeed rail. We
don't have smoothly functional cities
that have a lot of um public order. And
I don't think that the US should try to
emulate a lot of these things. But I
think there are better things to emulate
because a lot of what Trump is building
are gilded ballrooms and detention
centers. And you know, we're getting
quite a lot of just I think many of the
worst aspects of authoritarianism.
>> Um, you know, I'm cur I said at the
beginning, uh, you've had this huge
rise. You were everyone is obsessed with
this story right now. Everyone, it's
it's just every every day I wake up and
there's just, you know, it's on social
media, it's coming from DC, it's, etc.
everyone is sort of maybe miles a gape
at the capacity of China to build that
dam or you know you open uh Instagram
and it's some crazy drone show or
something like that that shows the
technical prowess there. I'm curious
like from you know this wasn't the case
the sort of popular popularization of
all this when you started your book or
certainly not the first time uh we had
you on the show. What do you make of
that? like how has perceptions of China
changed or maybe even your own
perception of China changed since you
started really focusing on this stuff?
>> Well, Joe, maybe Chinese industrialism
has been my white whale for quite a long
time. I'm sorry.
>> I'm sorry. Um, I moved to Hong Kong at
the start of 2017 from Silicon Valley
where I used to be working in part
because I was feeling that a lot of the
technologies that was important in
Silicon Valley at the time were not so
interesting. It was a lot of
cryptocurrencies was a lot of consumer
platforms. We hadn't even gotten to SAS
for business uh yet. And so it was just
not that interesting. And so when I had
uh lunch with Arthur Crober and he told
me about something called made in China
2025, I thought that ultra high voltage
transmission um electric vehicle
batteries, memory chips, these were far
more interesting. But I felt that it was
actually making a distinctively
unpopular decision among my Silicon
Valley peers because they thought that
they were the center of the universe,
which is a view they still hold. and
what are we doing if we're not being in
San Francisco and not pursuing some
aspect of tech and so when I moved to
China it did definitely didn't feel like
the elitist you know popular thing to do
but I was really glad to go take a look
at what China was building and I think
that there is a broader sense in Silicon
Valley that you know tech is important
but non- tech is also important right
now I feel like a lot of folks in um
Silicon Valley where I spend a lot of
time at as as a fellow at Hoover you
know a A lot of folks are trying to
build God in a box and that attention
has shifted to AI and I feel like that
has become a totalizing aspect once more
and I feel like part of my task is still
to remind people that you know drones
are important and bridges are important
and we live in a material world and you
know let's build up a manufacturing base
as well.
>> That was actually going to be my next
question. And so with the focus shifting
to AI, you could make an argument that
the US has the lead there still, even
though we've seen moments of panic with
the deepseek model earlier this year and
things like that. But on the other hand,
I suppose you could argue that AI also
needs vast amounts of physical
infrastructure, including data centers,
energy, chips. Who has the upper hand
when it comes to AI? I don't have a
super strong view on this, but I could
outline a potential scenario in which uh
China is going to be leading on AI based
on a few factors. First and most
important, as you point out, Tracy, that
China has a lot of electrical power. So,
the US may have all of the computing
because it has all of the um advanced
chips from Nvidia. As Howard Lutnik
says, China has at best the fourth best
chips uh in terms of AI. And that is a
pretty substantial constraint. But what
is a bigger US constraint maybe right
now going forward is that there just
isn't enough electrical power. Um
especially if you know Trump is taking
wind turbines offline and being very
discriminatory about certain types of
energy. Um and China I think has
organized itself as a civilization to
deny nothing towards heavy industry.
Whatever heavy industry wants it is
going to get. And that could be powered
by solar, could be powered by wind, it
could be powered by coal, it could be
powered by nuclear. But China will not
have this issue that uh Meta faced
earlier uh in the end of last year in
which a rare species of B prevented Meta
from building a giant new power facility
and China will definitely not do that.
So China has a lot of electrical power.
China may not have a lot of advanced
chips, but it has a lot of mature chips
which are going to be necessary for
inference. So, if we do invent God in a
box, you know, we're going to be running
queries all the time to figure out how
to um automate and shop and whatever
else. And that is going to require a lot
of processing power. And I think this is
where uh China's mature chips are going
to have a pretty good advantage. And
China also has, I think, another unique
advantage, which is that its training
data uh might be more strategically
valuable. uh China has most of the
manufacturing capacity uh in the world
um or about 30% of manufacturing value
add but that is quite a large chunk and
you know what does the US have well we
have a lot of consulting companies and a
lot of healthcare companies so maybe the
US will automate something on the scale
of Mckenzie and China will automate
something on the scale of Foxcon and um
you know they're going to have a lot
more manufacturing production and we're
going to have a lot more better
consultants. Yeah, I suppose there's a
synergy here where you could use AI to
make your manufacturing more efficient,
right?
>> No, totally. And we talked to um uh
Cameron Johnson about that, the
diffusion of AI within it and right like
a factory that's monitored properly is
brimming with fresh training data all
the time and that has a compounding
effect and an accelerating effect and so
forth potentially widening um that gap.
I want to ask actually another AI
question. It's not even about um US
China per se. Maybe a more US question.
You use the word totalizing and I've
been thinking about this exactly in a
couple of different ways like one is
like I wonder about whether people have
lost interest in things like say drug
discovery in part because of this
implicit assumption well once we achieve
AGI in two years that will do all the
drug discovery. So why are we even
bothering with working on that in the
meantime? And also it feels like much of
culture strikes me in the US as sort of
disappearing and other things like that
people are just sort of losing interest
in lots of things because AI is crowding
out in the psychological space
everything else. And I'm curious if in
your time in San Francisco or think or
Bay Area thinking about these things
whether that rings true or not.
>> Definitely. I hear the craziest when I'm
in California and I hear, you know, I
think a lot of people are, you know,
very um smart uh Stanford kids who are
very smart and yet they could be very
narrow-minded and not uh have a very
broad view. I heard some things like,
you know, people say, well, maybe we
don't need to think so much about
climate change, for example, anymore.
And I say, oh, well, why don't we have
to think about climate change? because
uh AI will uh figure out how what we
need to do with climate change and
implement everything. Maybe we don't
need to, you know, be so um careful
about teaching kids how to read the
great books or maybe even to read at all
because AI will just help us get there.
And there is this you know there's
they're trying to you know manifest the
escaton uh in Silicon Valley and there
is also this bit of an apocalyptic error
in which you know maybe the world will
end in 2027 because AGI will be out
there and it's not going to be aligned
and all of the our world will will kind
of just end. I really don't buy that
view. I believe that we have to have a
longer term view about everything. There
is kind of this you know sense often in
DC this is not consensus but every so
often one would hear that oh the
communist party is so weak there
legitimacy is so thin and that might
topple over at any moment and we don't
really have to treat it serious that
feels very much like cope and there is
also a Silicon Valley variant which is
not uh really the same about China but
there is this sense that well you know
we're all we're all going to ascend into
utopia um in 2027 when we uh you know
invent all the AI and the super
intelligence.
>> I like how binary everything is. It's
either utopia or, you know, the
apocalypse. Um, on the note of potential
own goals, one of the things we've had
now is years and years and years of US
export controls on semiconductors going
into China. And I remember you were very
early in describing this as a sort of
Chinese sputnick moment. this idea that
this was the moment when China really
realized that it actually had to produce
these things itself and try to regain or
get the lead over the US when it comes
to crucially strategic technology.
Now that the dust has kind of settled,
although clearly things are happening on
the tariff side, but now that we've had
years and years and years of export
controls, does it look like that spurred
China's technological development?
>> I think that it definitely spurred
China's technology development. Uh if we
take a look at some of these uh
sanctioned companies today, um Smick,
which was on the entity list in 2020,
now has double the revenues of that
level. Uh Huawei, which had the most
severe export controls. It was kind of
like a new export control invented
specifically to hurt Huawei, has by now
recovered its revenues back to the 2019
presence levels. And I, you know, being
in China was, uh, just this really stark
reminder that US export controls really
accelerated a lot of Chinese efforts to
do better. Now, Beijing has always had
this ambition to be a technology power.
It's had this ambition for a very long
time, but for the most part, it didn't
have a lot of China's most dynamic
companies willing to sign on because a
lot of China's most dynamic companies,
let's say Huawei, Bite Dance, DJI, they
were able to say to Beijing, well, we
need to make the most efficient 5G
equipment uh or the most efficient
drones or the most uh efficient short
form video, whatever it is, um products
that we should export around the world.
And therefore, we need to be be buying
the best products in the world. And that
was overwhelmingly things like Qualcomm
chips or Nvidia chips or whatever else.
And what the US government did was that
it kneecapped their ability to access US
equipment at a stroke. And that fully
aligned them uh into Beijing's uh goals
of technology pursuit. And now you have
Huawei being all sweetness and light to
Chinese domestic vendors to say, well,
why don't we work together? We really
have a lot of common interests here.
Huawei was not super big into
semiconductors uh in uh 2019 in terms of
their um production, but now Huawei is
one of the biggest uh spenders in um uh
semiconductors R&D. And I believe I just
saw a Bloomberg piece saying that
Huawei's chips are now rolling off the
production line. And that was something
I think entirely created by the US
government that all of these fiercely
competitive companies uh really were
fighting for their lives uh solving you
know seven problems a day before
breakfast um because they had to solve
all of these problems and I think that
probably wasn't necessary over the
broader strokes. One of the things that
causes alarm for DC regarding China, I
mean, look, it's great that countries
are getting richer and the technological
frontier is being pushed and innovation
anywhere theoretically can help anyone
everywhere, but this question and it's
more sort of political perhaps
geopolitical than economic is does China
have ambitions outside of its borders?
Right? We know the US has we have we
have military positions all over the
place and we clearly have ambitions
outside of its borders. I China has no
formal alliances I believe with any
country etc. But there's always this
concern. What what do you think about
China's interest in the rest of the
world beyond sort of export
destinations?
>> I think that China is very deeply
interested in Taiwan and the South China
Sea and which it defines as within its
own borders. And so you know that is a
matter of dispute.
>> Um I think that China is very keenly
interested in dominating most of
Southeast Asia. And
>> and what does dominating mean?
>> I think that they would really like for
the leaders of Malaysia and Vietnam in
the Philippines to come regularly to
Beijing to cout for the emperor's
pleasure. And maybe that is a pretty big
threat to US interests. I think that is
something that we can debate. I would be
skeptical that China has broader goals
to seize Japan. I think that would uh be
pretty fanciful. I think that um China's
success uh right now is building a lot
of advanced manufacturing. Um you're
right, I've been tracking this for a
very long time. I remember my uh first
appearance on OddLots in 2017 to talk
about uh made in China 2025
>> and I was pretty uh constructive that
China was going to figure out a lot of
these technologies and I think that was
fairly out of consensus at the time and
I think that was um you know fairly
China has made incredible strides beyond
my expectations of um you know and I was
been pretty bullish about a lot of that
and something I worry about is that I
think that China's success in advance
manufacturing will continue. I just
wrote a piece with Arthur Crober in
foreign affairs pointing out that even
though China's economy is slowing and
even though there's all sorts of
problems with the economy and the
political system, they're going to keep
advancing on on manufacturing and
technology because they have the
manufacturing process knowledge and they
have the investments um really to push
them forward. And I think that we're
already seeing that China is
de-industrializing Germany. Brad sets
great charts on this all the time,
especially in the automotive sector. I
think that China will continue to
de-industrialize the rest of East Asia
uh uh Europe as well and that will move
on to the United States as well. And I
don't have too many great views about
the security threat or you know what is
going to happen with with military but I
think this the clear and present danger
is that China's technology keeps
advancing and that will further
de-industrialize parts of the Midwest um
as well as you know many parts of Europe
and I think that is going to create all
sorts of political problems in the west
as well and that is the big danger that
I'm nervous about. What does the US need
to do in order to preserve its own
manufacturing capacity and I guess
ideally build it out?
>> I think there has to be a lot more
investment in manufacturing process
knowledge which is all of the tacet
knowledge that we can't really write
down that we have to have be a lot
better at producing things like not only
semiconductors but also electric vehicle
batteries and broader sets of um
electronics as well. I think it would be
a good idea for the US to invite more
Chinese companies to build factories in
Michigan, Ohio, Wisconsin, find put some
controls on them. But if China's force
technology program worked against, let's
say, Apple and Tesla and all of these
other American companies, why don't we
do it to them and, you know, learn from
the best in terms of manufacturing? I'm
really skeptical that everything that
the Trump administration right now is
doing has been good for manufacturing.
Um, as best as we can tell, uh, the US
has lost 40,000 manufacturing jobs, uh,
since Liberation Day. Um, and that was
the last data reading that we have.
40,000 jobs, uh, lost. Um, I think that
it doesn't make sense to pursue
technology while kneecapping the NSF and
the NIH. It doesn't make sense to
kneecap uh, top universities. It doesn't
make sense to deport a lot of uh,
lowerkilled labor that are really
important for construction as well as
manufacturing. And it doesn't make sense
to try to intimidate higher skilled uh
people, researchers to be in the US as
well. Now, maybe there's something good
to be said for energy production in the
US. There's probably something good to
be said for the deregulatory agenda uh
under Trump to to build a little bit
more, but right now I'm not seeing much
energy and, you know, fervor to build
more than, let's say, detention centers,
coal plants, gilded ballrooms, not
really the sort of, you know, advanced
manufacturing that America needs. It's
funny anything about um coal powered
electric vehicles in the future, coal
powered uh AI data centers or whatever,
but it uh seems like a plausible thing
that we'll see at one point. Um you know
one area where the US is clearly
dominant and uh we've already touched on
this and you said uh is like you know
global internet services and obviously
you have what I guess now we'd call the
legacy ones like your meta and
Microsofts and Amazon but also you know
open AI is still you know it's the
biggest in the world and it could be on
scale and have a footprint um as big as
some of these other giants. Um it seems
like the world is very happy to buy BYD
cars and other built things. We saw the
UK uh D Huawei itself uh several years
ago. Will the rest of the world adopt
Chinese core tech or do you think
there's still an anxiety about this?
Maybe because of perceptions of the
influence that the party would have over
these companies etc. Does the US still
enjoy a relative advantage in the
comfort that around the world people
have with using sort of US digital
services?
>> Certainly, I think there's a lot of
governments that are really nervous
about uh Chinese technologies. um the
UK, there's all sorts of restrictions on
um Huawei products kind of globally and
we've seen even countries really
friendly towards China really complain
about how much it is flooding their
markets. We've seen Brazil complain
about this. We've seen Russia complain
about this. Um and so I think
governments all over the world are
trying to you know have some measure to
block Chinese goods. On the other hand,
I think consumers really don't care. Um,
you know what?
>> That's what I mean. Like for a car or
you know I would I'd like a Xiaomi
phone. No, I don't know. Maybe they look
they look pretty cool or a uh ZTE phone
or Huawei.
>> Careful. That's a national security
threat. We are reporting you. Um, but I
think yeah, definitely there's a lot of
people who
>> the cameras seem great.
>> The cameras seem great and the BYD cars
and the Xiaomi cars seem to be also
really good as well. people want to buy
these things and I think the Chinese
attitude is okay if you want to tariff
us um we'll challenge you in WTO if
that's still a thing or we'll you know
try to push back diplomatically but
we're not going to restrain our own
exports um what we need to do is you
know if you want to block our exports
and make goods more expensive for your
consumers that's on you so um you know I
think that's kind of it attitude and I
think there's also some nervousness now
among European governments from buying
American cloud I don't know if that is
going to necessarily to fewer purchases.
But maybe
>> Tracy, do you have the Xiaomi dog
feeder?
>> No, I don't. Have you seen that?
>> I wasn't even aware of this.
>> That's the thing that's incredible on
show me. It's not just, oh, there's a
phone company then when cars, you know,
there's a Xiaomi rice cooker. There's a
Xiaomi toaster.
>> What does the dog feeder do?
>> I think but I think it's like a smart
dog feeder and it knows when to release
more food into the bowl and using all
these sensors and stuff.
>> No, I'm old school. I just have a bowl
that I fill.
>> That might be your That might be my
Christmas present, too, if I can acquire
one.
>> Oh, thank you. You're getting a first
edition of uh Moby Dick if I can
>> please with the uh the Rockwell Kent
illustration.
>> Okay. All right. Noted. Noted. Um I just
want to go back to what we were talking
about in the intro for a second uh which
is the new involution campaign. Um again
it seems like China is trying to get a
handle on some of these overcapacity
issues. Is it going to work? And what
are your general thoughts on this fresh
attempt? I was living in China when uh
China first announced this big supply
side reform effort uh back in 2017 when
it tried to reduce a lot of its
expansions in um steel and this was kind
of um the big effort. What's really
different right now is that China is
trying to uh control not really the
activities of the stateowned enterprise
sector is trying to control more the
activities of the private sector and I
think that is much more difficult uh as
well
>> and I think you know it's going to be
too early to say but it there may be a
view uh there may be a future in which
>> China actually consolidates a lot of the
solar production to a few bigger firms
but then all of them become much more
capable and they become you know much
bigger threats. uh to you know foreign
solar makers to the extent that there
are any but consolidation is probably
going to help raise quality because
there are going to be fewer firms
earning more profit that are going to be
able to reinvest more in expansion and
R&D so I think that overp production is
kind of endemic to China which is partly
why it's the engineering state this is
what they're really good at they're just
not thinking enough about services and
so I'm skeptical that they're going to
be able to really tamp down over
production over the longer run.
>> All right, Dan Wong, the book is
Breakneck. It's a fantastic read. Joe
and I make a very brief appearance, so
if anyone's interested in that as well,
definitely pick it up. But yeah, thank
you so much for coming back on and for
being on the pod repeatedly over almost
a decade now.
>> I want to be a friend of the pod for the
next decade as well.
>> That's right. Thank you both.
>> Thank you so much,
>> Joe. Always good to have Dan on and I'm
so glad he sort of like synthesized and
laid out all of his thoughts because
again like Dan has been
>> watching Chinese technology and
analyzing the Chinese economy for years
and years and years before it was cool
and really in many respects had a front
row seat to some pretty big developments
like the tech crackdown like COVID zero
policies in China. So
>> it's really good to read his narrative
and get his thoughts.
>> No, Dan's the best. I love him. You
know, it's interesting I I was thinking
about and uh I saw some discussion of
this online. I forget who,
>> but one of the tensions, you know, one
thing we didn't talk about um is, you
know, there is an the persistent real
estate slump, right, in China. They have
not there has not yet been a bottom.
It's not the end of the world. And
actually, cheaper housing, many people
would say that would be a nice problem
to have from the US perspective right
now. But if you think about the
combination of consolidating the private
sector, if you say, okay, there's over
production in the private sector, what
that means is that there's a lot of
people employed who shouldn't be or who
are it's unsustainable. If you think
about that shrinking, that's that's
going to be a contributor to a softening
of the real estate. That's fewer people
who have jobs. That's fewer people who
can buy homes. So when you think about
the internal balances there's some real
attentions because it's like yeah of
course let's consolidate but then you
add to the woes of one of the biggest
sectors of the economy
>> and I mean we have seen the youth
unemployment rate pick up recently and I
think that's where you start to get into
some interesting questions around the
social contract that the party has with
people and this you know expectation
that living standards are going to
continue to improve forever like that is
the pressure on the party right and to
some extent as you point out its
intention with the idea of having very
efficient companies that are operating
at at scale and at low cost.
>> You know, one of the things too that uh
comes up I think in a lot of the China
conversations is the sort of uselessness
of a lot of political terms that we use
here. It came up with Joseph Turriian
when we were talking about oh like what
is what is the right you know the the
ultralleft within the party mean the
ultraight etc. But even hearing Dan talk
about, well, it's a sort of right-wing
Leninist country, etc. Like these words
that we use to describe politics, I
think they uh maybe they detract more
than they clarify when we're talking
about China.
>> I don't believe in political labels,
Joe.
>> No, that's good. That's good. All right.
I respect that.
>> Shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Thought Thoughts Podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Weisenthal. If you enjoyed
the conversation then please like and
subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching.
[Music]